[Music]
when I was in fourth grade my teacher
said to us one day there are as many
even numbers as there are numbers really
I thought well yeah there are infinitely
many of both so I suppose there are the
same number of them but on the other
hand the even numbers are only part of
the whole numbers all the odd numbers
are left over so there's got to be more
whole numbers and even numbers right to
see what my teacher was getting at let's
first think about what it means for two
sets to be the same size what do I mean
when I say I have the same number of
fingers on my right hand as I do on my
left hand of course that five fingers on
each but it's actually simpler than that
I don't have to count I only need to see
that I can match them up one to one in
fact we think that some ancient people
who spoke languages that didn't have
words for numbers greater than three use
this sort of matching for instance if
you let your sheep out of a pen to graze
you can keep track of how many went out
by setting aside a stone for each one
and then putting those stones back one
by one when the sheep return so you know
if any are missing without really
counting as another example of matching
being more fundamental and counting if
I'm speaking to a packed auditorium
where every seat is taken and no one is
standing I know that there are the same
number of chairs as people in the
audience even though I don't know how
many there are of either so what we
really mean when we say that two sets
are the same size is that the elements
in those sets can be matched up one by
one in some way so my fourth-grade
teacher showed us the whole numbers laid
out in a row and below each we have it's
double as you can see the bottom row
contains all the even numbers and we
have a one-to-one match that is there
are as many even numbers as there are
numbers but what still bothers us is our
distress over the fact that the even
numbers seem to be only part of the
whole numbers but does this convince you
that I don't have the same number of
fingers on my right hand as I do on my
left of course not it doesn't matter if
you try to match the elements of some
way and it doesn't work that doesn't
convince us of anything if you could
find one way in which the elements of
two sets do match up then we say those
two sets have the same number of
elements can you make a list of all the
fractions this might be hard there are a
lot of fractions and it's not obvious
what to put first or how to be sure all
of them are on the list nevertheless
there is a very clever way that we can
make a list of all the fractions this
was first done by Georg Cantor
in the late 1800s first we put all the
fractions into a grid they're all there
for instance you can find say 117 over
243 in 117 throw and 240 third column
now we make a list out of this by
starting at the upper left and sweeping
back and forth diagonally skipping over
any fraction like 2 over 2 that
represents the same number as 1 we've
already picked and so we get a list of
all the fractions which means we've
created a one-to-one match between the
whole numbers and the fractions despite
the fact that we thought maybe there
ought to be more fractions okay here's
where it gets really interesting you may
know they're not all real numbers that
is not all the numbers on a number line
our fractions the square root of 2 and
pi for instance any number like this is
called irrational not because it's crazy
or anything but because the fractions
are ratios of whole numbers and so are
called rationals meaning the rest are
non rational that is irrational
Irrational's are represented by infinite
non repeating decimals so we make a
one-to-one match between the whole
numbers and a set of all the decimals
both the rationals and the Irrational's
that is can we make a list of all the
decimal numbers can't the show that you
can't not merely that we don't know how
but that it can't be done
look suppose you claim you have made a
list of all the decimals I'm gonna show
you that you didn't succeed by producing
a decimal that's not on your list I'll
construct my decimal one place at a time
for the first decimal place of my number
I'll look at the first decimal place of
your first number if it's a one I'll
make mine a two otherwise I'll make mine
a 1 for the second place of my number
I'll look at the second place of your
second number again if yours is a 1 I'll
make mine a 2 and otherwise I'll make
mine a 1 see how this is going the
decimal I produce can't be on your list
why could it be say your hundred forty
third number
no because the 143rd place of my decimal
is different from the hundred forty
third place of your 143rd number i made
it that way your list is incomplete it
doesn't contain my decimal number and no
matter what list you give me i can do
the same thing and produce a decimal
that's not on that list
so we're faced with this astounding
conclusion the decimal numbers cannot be
put on a list they represent a bigger
infinity than the infinity of whole
numbers so even though we're familiar
with only a few rationals like square
root of two and pi the infinity of her
rationals is actually greater than
infinity of fractions someone once said
that the rationals the fractions are
like the stars in the night sky the
Irrational's are like the blackness
Cantor also showed that for any infinite
set forming a new set made of all the
subsets of the original set represents a
bigger infinity than that original set
this means that once you have one
infinity you can always make a bigger
one by making the set of all subsets of
that first set and then an even bigger
that one and so on
and so there are an infinite number of
infinities of different sizes if these
ideas make you uncomfortable you're not
alone some of the greatest
mathematicians of Cantor's day were very
upset with this stuff they tried to make
these different infinities irrelevant to
make mathematics work without them
somehow Cantor was even vilified
personally and got so bad for him that
he suffered severe depression and spent
the last half of his life in and out of
mental institutions but eventually his
ideas won out today they're considered
fundamental and magnificent all research
mathematicians accept these ideas every
college math major learns them and I've
explained them to you in a few minutes
someday perhaps they'll become a
knowledge there's more
pointed out that the set of decimal
numbers that is the real numbers is a
bigger infinity than a set of whole
numbers cantor wonder whether there are
infinities of different sizes between
these two infinities he didn't believe
they were but couldn't prove it
Cantor's conjecture became known as the
continuum hypothesis in 1900 the great
mathematician David Hilbert listed the
continuum hypothesis as the most
important unsolved problem in
mathematics the 20th century saw a
resolution of this problem but in a
completely unexpected paradigm
shattering way in the 1920s Kurt Kartal
showed that you could never prove that
the continuum hypothesis is false then
in the 1960s Paul J Kahn showed that you
can never prove that the continuum
hypothesis is true taken together these
results mean that there are unanswerable
questions in mathematics a very stunning
conclusion mathematics is rightly
considered the pinnacle of human
reasoning but we now know that even
mathematics has its limitations still
mathematics has some truly amazing
things for us to think about
you